Enhancements of the upgrade guide for 18, since we detected some inconsistencies (#6609)
plone/volto: docs/source/upgrade-guide/index.md

For more information see {doc}`../contributing/version-policy`.

```{note}
[Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone) is the official boilerplate generator for Plone projects.
We keep Cookieplone up to date and in sync with the current Volto release.

> We encourage you to keep all your code inside your project add-on(s).

Author: I think that the "and not modify core code" is misleading and not necessary. Not that it's not true, but it has no value to mention it in here.

> We encourage you to keep all your code inside your project add-on(s).

Reviewer: Revised suggestion

If you do so, once you want to upgrade your project, you can generate a new project using Cookieplone with the same name as your old one, and copy over the add-ons to the new boilerplate.

> Even if you have modified the boilerplate, moving things around and copying over your dependencies is better and quicker than dealing with following the upgrade steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is usually better and quicker to move your items into new locations and copy your dependencies than dealing with following the upgrade steps, regardless of whether you have modified the boilerplate.
```

```

(volto-upgrade-guide-18.x.x)=

## Upgrading to Volto 18.x.x

(upgrade-18-cookieplone-label)=

### Cookieplone is now the recommended project and add-on generator for Volto 18

```{versionadded} Volto 18.0.0-alpha.43
```

> [Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone) is now the recommended way to develop Volto projects, using it as a boilerplate generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone) is now the recommended way to develop Volto projects, using it as a boilerplate project generator.
```

Cookieplone uses the frontend code installed using `pnpm` instead of `yarn`.
This affects the way that the Plone Release Team generates the Sponsored OSS Docker images, since they must be compatible with the `pnpm` setup.

Since Volto `18.0.0-alpha.43`, the Docker image [`plone-frontend`](https://hub.docker.com/r/plone/plone-frontend) uses `pnpm`.

> For developers that won't migrate their boilerplate and code to the new setup with `pnpm` instead of `yarn`, the Release Team will generate a new Docker image named `plone-frontend:18-yarn` for the Volto 18 series of alpha releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For developers that won't migrate their projects to the new setup with `pnpm` instead of `yarn`, the Release Team will generate a new Docker image named `plone-frontend:18-yarn` for the Volto 18 series of alpha releases.
```

Support for `yarn` will be dropped in Volto 19.

```{deprecated} Volto 18.0.0-alpha.43
The `yarn`-based generator [`@plone/generator-volto`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@plone/generator-volto) package and project boilerplates generated from it are deprecated and will not receive any further updates.

> The recommended way of generating a project boilerplate is [Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended way of generating a boilerplate project is [Cookieplone](https://github.com/plone/cookieplone).
```

> Please update your code to use the `pnpm` based setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please update your code to use the `pnpm`-based setup.
```

### Volto's internal `dependencies` and `devDependencies` are now properly sorted out

```{deprecated} Volto 18.0.0-alpha.43

> This step is only valid for projects that choose to continue using `yarn`-based generator and they haven't updated to Cookieplone `pnpm`-based setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step is only valid for projects that continue to use the `yarn`-based generator and haven't updated to Cookieplone `pnpm`-based setups.
See {ref}`upgrade-18-cookieplone-label` for details.
```

### New dependencies synchronizer

```{deprecated} Volto 18.0.0-alpha.43

> This step is only valid for projects that choose to continue using `yarn`-based generator and they haven't updated to Cookieplone `pnpm`-based setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step is only valid for projects that continue to use the `yarn`-based generator and haven't updated to Cookieplone `pnpm`-based setups.
See {ref}`upgrade-18-cookieplone-label` for details.
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: Should we link back to upgrade-18-cookieplone-label from these notices?

Reviewer: Agreed. I added a suggestion in the two admonitions.

Author: Done.

However, this is discouraged, because the React 18 rendering could have unexpected side effects.
It is recommended that you use the React API instead.

### `@plone/registry` moved to ESM

`@plone/registry` and [other packages on which Volto depends](https://github.com/plone/volto/tree/main/packages) are now stand-alone releases in the monorepo structure released in 18.0.0-alpha.4.

Also, the `@plone/registry` package has been moved to ESM.
The add-on registry scripts have also been refactored to TypeScript.
For maximum compatibility with CommonJS builds, the default exports have been moved to named exports.
The modules affected are now built, and the import paths have changed, too.
These changes force some import path changes that you should patch in your Plone project or add-on boilerplates.

```{note}

> As always, when something changes in the boilerplate, you may regenerate one from Cookieplone and move your code into it, instead of fiddling with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As always, when something changes in the boilerplate project generator, you may generate a new project with Cookieplone and move your code into it, instead of manually editing multiple files.
See {ref}`upgrade-18-cookieplone-label` for details.
```
